Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about something
called the “Penny Dreadful”.
A penny is, as you may know, the smallest
denomination of the British pound, and
dreadful means awful, very bad, terrible.
And put together, a “Penny Dreadful”
was a type of short horror story
popular during the Victorian era.
It’s a genre that has all but died
out today, in its original format at
least, but was one of the biggest crazes
of 19th Century Britain, even being
called “the Victorian equivalent of
video games”, and being described as
“Britain’s first taste of mass-produced
popular culture for the young".
So let’s get right into it and talk about
the phenomenon of the penny dreadful.
“The rising moon was just peeping
above the horizon, and a few
faint, sickly beams of light shot
up from it into the night sky.
Standing in the middle of the
road […] was a horse and rider.
The moonlight shimmered upon
both with a strange effect.
The rider was tall and muscular and sat
in the saddle with an ease and grace.
The steed, [or horse] , which
he rode was none other than the
celebrated ‘Black Bess’, her rider
went by the name of Dick Turpin.”
The horseman was leaning forward
in his saddle and intensely
listening as a carriage approached.
Inside the carriage were a man
and wife and they were travelling
with a rare treasure, a golden
cup, which they had been closely
guarding throughout their journey.
As the couple made their way towards
Turpin, they suddenly heard a
gunshot and got so frightened that
their golden cup fell to the floor.
Then they heard a voice: “pull up,
coachman, or you are a dead man!”
It was Turpin, and when the coach
stopped he approached the window.
The husband’s terror was clear
on his face and he asked if
Turpin was going to kill them.
Turpin assured that he was not
before he lifted his hat and said
“I am sorry to trouble you, but
this is really a case of necessity.”
He then demanded their money,
jewellery and the golden cup.
Fearing Turpin and his gun, the couple
did as they were told and got out
of the carriage to give their riches
to the robber while the coachman,
or driver, had ran off to get help.
As they struggled to remove their
jewellery and grab the golden cup from the
floor of the carriage, an army of around
12 police emerged from around the corner…
This is the story from the very first
instalment, or episode, of Black Bess,
a series that would go on to become the
most popular of the Penny Dreadfuls.
The sudden ending, or cliffhanger, was
typical of these stories as they had
to keep their readers eagerly awaiting
the next episode the following week.
And this strategy was clearly a
success, as Black Bess continued
for a whopping 254 books.
People couldn’t get enough of the
adventures of Dick Turpin, the highwayman
who lived a century before these
tales made him famous in the 1860s.
And Turpin was not alone, for tales
about highwaymen were the longest lasting
trend within penny dreadful literature.
By the time Turpin rode onto the scene in
1868, penny dreadfuls had been around for
roughly 30 years, and there were more than
a million copies being sold every week.
Given that many would be bought and
read aloud to groups of multiple
people, it’s safe to assume that the
number of people who either read or
listened to a Penny Dreadful story
would be several times this number.
And when you think that the entire
population of England and Wales was 17
million people in 1851, we are likely
talking about the vast majority of
the teenage population of the country.
But what was so special
about these stories?
And how did they get so popular?
Well, as the name suggests, penny
dreadfuls were sold for a single penny.
Sure, a penny back in the 19th century
was worth a lot more than it is
today, but it was still very cheap.
One penny is about 25p now, it's
a quarter of a pound, but perhaps
a better comparison is that one
instalment of these books was about
the same price as a loaf of bread.
And to give you another point of
comparison, this genre was very
cheap compared to normal books,
books you may well have heard of.
For example, an instalment of a Charles
Dickens novel such as Oliver Twist would
cost around 12 pennies, or 1 shilling.
Before you’re thinking, hang on,
these Penny Dreadfuls are just short
stories or chapters of a book, no
wonder Oliver Twist was more expensive,
it's an entire book, remember that
Charles Dickens also published
his books in the same, serialised,
format, with new instalments coming
out over a period of weeks or months.
So, each instalment of a Penny Dreadful
was incredibly cheap, less than
1/10th of the cost of a normal book.
As you might expect, this low price tag
did a great deal to expand the number
of people who were able to read or, if
they were illiterate, listen to these
stories, and in so doing for the first
time it opened up literature to society’s
poorest, which in Victorian England,
was the majority of the population.
So, how was it possible
to make them so cheap?
Well, partly, automation.
Innovations in printing technology
allowed for mass produced prints
on very cheap and thin paper.
With the invention of the steam
powered press in 1814, printing had
become mechanical and automated.
It was 5 times faster than the at-the-time
revolutionary Gutenberg printing press.
Paper was cheap, for once, and the
process of printing onto the paper,
and then putting it all together,
was more efficient than ever before.
To keep costs low, they did not
have fancy thick book covers,
they were simply 8 to 16 pages of
thin paper with columns of text.
Really, they were more like a
modern-day magazine or comic book.
And let’s not forget the cost
of actually writing the stories.
This genre, much like what is
disparagingly called “airport novels”
nowadays, was written quickly, often
with generic and formulaic characters.
Authors working for publishing houses
would write tirelessly, often being paid
a penny per line and being responsible
for up to 10 stories at the same time.
As a result, Penny Dreadfuls
were criticised for their lack
of literary merit, for not
being particularly good books.
We’ll come to some of the results of
this shortly, but the point to remember
here is that they were very cheap
to make, meaning that they could be
sold for the cost of a loaf of bread.
And the result of these penny
dreadfuls being so affordable was,
of course, that they could be bought
and enjoyed by people who would never
have been able to buy a book before.
The 19th century was, after all, a time
of booming literacy rates in Britain,
principally due to the widespread
availability of schooling for children.
In the 1830s, under 50% of women and
only around 60% of men could read.
Within just 40 years, by the mid 1870s,
90% of the British population could read.
And despite these better education
outcomes for children, as you may
know, life in Victorian Britain was
pretty tough and miserable, especially
at the start of the 19th century.
In 1821, almost half of the entire
workforce was under the age of 20
and the average age children began
working was just 10 years old.
They would work in factories, on
farms, as chimney sweeps, in all
manner of tough and dangerous jobs.
Even Charles Dickens, who became the
most celebrated and successful of
Victorian writers, worked as a child
in a factory that produced boot polish.
Throughout the 19th century, the
British government did pass legislation
to improve the plight of the working
poor, but it was a slow process.
In 1833, for example, the “Factory
Act'' was celebrated as a wonderful
thing for children, but what did it say?
Only that you had to be 9
years old to legally work.
In any case, even if it did improve,
slightly, life as a child in Victorian
Britain was somewhat miserable.
And suddenly, along came this option
of reading stories of adventure,
mystery, murder, and the supernatural,
all at a price that wouldn’t break the
bank, that you could actually afford.
As such, these books provided a welcome
escape from the drudgery, boredom and
hardship of factory life or classroom
learning, and they were a massive hit.
So, you are probably wondering, what
were these stories actually about?
Well, you heard a bit of one at the
start of this episode, and you may
have heard of some of the others.
Sweeney Todd, which was turned into a Tim
Burton movie starring Johnny Depp, was
one of the most famous Penny Dreadfuls.
If you haven’t heard the story, or
seen the 2007 film, this tale is
all about a barber, a hairdresser,
who killed his customers by slitting
their throats with his razor.
And the customers weren’t just killed,
they were turned into meat pies and
sold to unwitting members of the public.
Then there was Black Bess, which we
heard at the start of the episode.
And these are just to name a few.
Before long, increasing amounts of
penny dreadfuls emerged and there
was a huge choice of which weekly
tale or scandalous character whose
adventures its readers could follow.
Between 1830 and 1850 there were up to 100
publishers offering these cheap stories.
In the beginning, the stories were
usually about highwaymen like Dick
Turpin, men who stopped people
on the roads and robbed them.
Indeed, the very first penny dreadful
which came out in 1836 was a collection
of biographies called The Lives
of the Most Notorious Highwaymen.
As a quick side note, if you
haven’t listened to our episode
on Highwaymen, it’s quite a fun
one, it’s episode number 197.
Over time, though, other
characters and storylines began
to increase in popularity, it
wasn’t only about criminals.
The most popular series was The Mysteries
of London, which published a new episode
every week for 12 years, each one selling
around a quarter of a million copies.
These stories were based in the
Victorian slums, or poor areas of the
city where many of the readers lived,
and they turned the grim surroundings
into adventurous sites of mystery.
Whether it was a murder or a scandalous
plot against a rich and evil superior,
readers loved these sensational tales.
As to the question of why, well, you
only have to take a look at the most
popular genres on YouTube or Netflix to
see that this genre, this style, this
type of story, is still equally popular.
True crime, mysteries, the supernatural,
we can debate the reasons why, but
modern series like True Detective or
Stranger Things are, in some ways, simply
developments, and certainly more expensive
developments, on the Penny Dreadful genre.
And the serialised format certainly
helped boost their popularity.
Just like if your favourite TV series
ends on a cliffhanger, ends with something
exciting happening that might change
the plot completely, well this was
exactly the same with the Penny Dreadful.
People would save their money, eagerly
awaiting the next instalment so they
could see what would happen next.
There were even stories of book clubs
being formed, kids who couldn’t afford
the 1 penny price tag would club
together and buy a book to share, and
even those children who weren’t able
to read would join the club and listen
to the story being read out loud.
Initially, the subjects tended to be
believable but “real-life” style stories
- murderers, adventure, and so on, but all
within the confines of the “real” world.
As time went on, Penny
Dreadfuls started to become more
supernatural as well, involving
supernatural beasts and goings-on.
There were vampires, ghosts, evil
spirits, all of whom would commit gruesome
crimes to the delight of their readers.
But, as with any new craze, especially
one that captivates the hearts and minds
of the young, it wasn’t long before there
were as many critics as there were fans.
Much like horror movies or violent
video games today, there were
adult critics who feared the impact
that devouring these stories would
have on the children of the time.
Victorians were famously moralistic,
with the upper classes feeling like
they had a moral duty to protect
their supposed inferiors from moral
decay, and the phenomenon of the
Penny Dreadful was really the first
time that society en masse had had
access to this kind of entertainment.
It’s hard to overstate the fear and
moral panic that ensued, with one
newspaper in 1886 even declaring
that penny dreadfuls were, I quote,
“the poison which is threatening to
destroy the manhood of democracy”.
Why?
Well, just like video games, people
feared that simply reading about crime
would mean that someone was more likely
to commit crimes, that reading violent
stories could inspire violent acts.
And in the final two decades of the 19th
century, after the penny dreadful craze
had reached its height, people were
increasingly blaming the stories for
crimes actually committed by children.
Almost every month, there would be
news stories of crimes or acts that
were blamed on Penny Dreadfuls.
In 1892 there was one of some
schoolboys who ran away with a gun and
were caught with a note which read:
“Steal the money; go to the
station and get to Glasgow.
Get boat for America”.
People believed the boys were inspired
by tales such as Jack Harkaway’s
Schooldays, which was about a boy who
ran away to begin a life of adventure.
In the same year, the suicide of a
12-year-old boy who hanged himself
was also blamed on penny dreadfuls.
In court, the verdict was announced
as “suicide during temporary insanity,
induced by reading trashy novels”.
But tensions really hit an all-time
high in 1895, when the body of a
woman was found in a house in London.
The police didn’t have to search far
for her killers, as they were, in
fact, her 12- and 13-year-old sons.
The elder boy had insisted that
his brother told him to stab their
mother to death, and when the police
investigated, they found a huge collection
of penny dreadfuls in the house.
The copies were used as evidence in
the case and in court a judge called
for laws to “stop the inflammable and
shocking literature that is sold.”
All of these controversies were the
beginning of the end for the penny
dreadful craze, as publishers began to
distance themselves from problematic
material and real-life tragedies.
It’s not exactly good for business
if you’re being blamed for causing
terrible murders and suicides.
As a result, there was a gap in the
market for more uplifting stories for
children, stories that included moral
or educational lessons, stories that
ended well, stories without murder,
violence or brutality, stories that
a parent would be much happier to buy
for their child than a Penny Dreadful.
The patriotically named The Union
Jack was one of them, and in fact the
entire objective of The Union Jack
was, and I’m quoting directly, to “put
the Penny Dreadfuls out of business”.
The Union Jack had another
large advantage - its price.
It cost half a penny, half as
much money as a Penny Dreadful.
For a budget-conscious audience,
clearly this was a big advantage.
What’s more, there was a shift away
from serialised-fiction towards
full-length books, so when you could
buy a full novel of a few hundred
pages for the price of a handful of
Penny Dreadfuls, and the quality of the
narrative was a lot better, this option
suddenly wasn’t so expensive at all.
And on the other end of the spectrum,
during the 1870s there was a boom in
comic books, illustrated books, Which
were even more accessible than penny
dreadfuls, because there were pictures.
The Penny Dreadful genre was
being squeezed from all sides.
Everything that had made it so popular
- its price, its accessibility, its blood
and gore - was now available in different
formats, formats that were often preferred
by readers that had once snapped up
every Penny Dreadful on the shelf.
By the turn of the century, the Penny
Dreadful had practically died out.
Now, when it comes to the legacy of the
Penny Dreadful, fortunately the fears
about the genre destroying all morality
and poisoning democracy didn't come true.
Perhaps they might have inspired
some reckless behaviour, even violent
acts, but did they turn an entire
generation into rampant serial killers?
They did not.
In fact, many commentators now point to
the positive impact of the Penny Dreadful.
Sure, they may not have had the literary
merit of Jane Austen, Charles Dickens,
or Shakespeare, but they did encourage a
generation of children to start reading.
As one professor put it, penny
dreadfuls gave children “an
incentive to require literacy”.
In other words, they gave
children a reason, or some
motivation to learn to read.
They didn’t want to be left out when
everyone else was talking about the
latest robbery by Dick Turpin or who
Sweeney Todd’s latest victim was.
Now, it’s clearly an overstatement to say
that the Penny Dreadfuls single-handedly
increased literacy rates in Victorian
Britain, as there were plenty of other
factors that taught children how to read.
But, the Penny Dreadfuls did inspire a
generation to keep reading, to use the
skills that they had learned at school.
So, despite the critics and fears for the
morality of Victorian youth, and fears
that they would lead to the destruction of
the very fabric of society, it certainly
seems that there are many worse things
a Victorian child could have done than
getting addicted to Penny Dreadfuls.
Ok then, that is it for today’s
episode on Penny Dreadfuls.
I hope it was an interesting one,
and that you learned something new.
As always I would love to know what
you thought about this episode.
Are there equivalents of the
Penny Dreadful in your language?
Do you think that the concerns
about violent video games or
films are any different to the
concerns about Penny Dreadfuls?
If so, why?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.